---
date: '2010-09-13 05:25:23'
layout: post
slug: None
status: draft
title: Introducing LimPQ Service, Concepts and Ideas
wordpress_id: '619'
categories:
- twitter
---

[limpq.com](http://limpq.com) is my newest venture to help developers get rid of all the madness in implementing a web-based photo management application. The web interface is only my vision of how a web photo management app should look like. The whole idea behind limPQ is about providing simple and robust photo management system that can be easily customized and embedded. With limPQ, developer can create a photo management app in minutes by pure javascript API or RESTful API.

LimPQ photo management is a portfolio based system. A portfolio is the exclusive owner of any limPQ objects, includes photos, collections  etc. Each portfolio has full privilege over the objects it owns. In current implementation, without an identified portfolio authorization, all the objects are publicly read-only. The privacy is only guaranteed by obscure UUID. A registered user can create several portfolios, the number depends on their plan setting.

Another important concept in limPQ is the floor. Floor is a generic property in all limPQ objects. One limPQ object can only have one positive integer number to identify its floor. Floor mechanism provides an easy way to implement privilege management level. In the future, we intend to embed access control within floor.

Collection, as the name suggests, is a container of references to photos. A collection can have as many photos as you want, and one photo can belong to several collections. If only collection reflects the relationship between photos, to implement one yourself is trivial. But collection here is powered by NDQI. A collection contains three parts: a query string, a list of included photos, a list of excluded photos. With the help of NDQI, collection can reflect the changes in the portfolio. A new uploaded photo can be automatically assigned to collections (Not real-time in current implementation). In that sense, it is dynamic.
