---
date: '2010-03-29 22:09:26'
layout: post
slug: None
status: draft
title: Religious Pitfalls in Baath Movement
wordpress_id: '801'
categories:
- 随感
---

The Baath movement in 20th century tried to solve the Arab world problem by introducing modern western ideas and practices in order to create one united Arab nation. This cross-nation political organization of the 1920s was first founded under three principles: Unity, Liberty and Socialism. These three were the shared pursuit in early 20th century among most people in the world. Under these principles, the Baath Party is should never be considered as a religion oriented political organization. The intentional ignoring of the religious aspect in Arab people’s life helped the cross-border movement spread to wider population, but it also seeded the potential divisions and conflicts inside and outside the entity itself.

The secular aspect of Baath Party attracted people from all walk of life and essentially buried the seed for later disruption. The pan-Arab nationalism, which has been the central focus since the foundation of the Baath Party, is a secular ideology as opposition to the Ottoman's Turkish focus [1]. The direct inheritance of pan-Arab nationalism ideology as well as the secular aspect let the Baath movement could reach larger population in the Middle East. In the early days of Baath movement, they built more schools and hospitals than the Muslim Brotherhood, a religion-oriented organization, did in 20 years [2]. The Baath Party became quite popular in both Shi'ya and Sunni groups.

By putting aside the traditional Islamic religion structure, Baath Party went ahead and created their prolonged and inefficient management layer. For a fast-growing organization, instead of leveraging current establish religion structure, the process of creating new could be painful. The leadership of the original founders was questioned; the principles (social justice etc.) were argued; the leading role towards pan-Arab unity was still unclear[1]. The quick failure of the United Arab Republic (UAR) which was pushed hard by the Baath Party founders put all the disagreements up to the front. The later power division between Regional Commands and National Command was a direct result of the inability to construct efficient management structure in large organization. Notably, the founder Aflaq and Bitar never regain their power in Syria. These Regional Commands, which mostly ran by Military men, became a parallel structure. The National Command, which ideally should be the central control center, was isolated, degenerated to a symbol of Baath Party only.

The basic secular ideology of Baath Party was challenged in late 20th century. The principle of "unity" was proved to be unrealistic[3]. The failure of the UAR and Iraq's unwilling to join the UAR showed that it was problematic to emerge existing governments and evenly distribute power among the rulers. The wrongness of socialism part became evident with the disassembly of the Soviet Union. When two ("unity", "socialism") out of three principles were broken, the Baath Party felt the need to find other principles to hold their existence. Saddam Hussein, the leader of Baath Party in Iraq, started to seek a way to turn Baath Party, and himself, as the leader of Islam world. In the hope of uniting Islam world, he also passed a law to encourage inter-marriage between Shi'ya and Sunni groups. The Iran revolution in late 1970s started by, and the leadership was transferred to a religious group. It enhanced the impression that a secular ideology was not persuasive enough in Arab world. The struggle to shift the Baath Party ideology into more religion-oriented one was transparent when Saddam Hussein painted himself as the direct decent of Muhammad [1]. At that time, the lack of religion aspect for the Baath Party in its propaganda was widely accepted.

The other theory may suggest that the inner struggle between different national ruling powers was the main contributor to the fail of the Baath movement. However, they failed to explain why the later Europe Union (EU) is successfully united even more nations. The culture similarity between Arab nations is much higher than the between EU nations, and in the Ottoman Empire period, they were physically united. The struggle of ruling powers is only one of many solvable barriers on the road to a united nation if only they can work under a unified religion framework.

The Baath movement had and exercised serial aggressive moves in the belief of creating one united Arab nation, but it failed. On the other hand, the Islam, a non-aggressive religion penetrated and thrived in the same area for hundreds of years. In the way to a united Arab nation, the doctrine from Koran can never, ever be forgotten.

[1] The Baath Party: Rise and Metamorphosis, John F. Devlin, The American History Review Vol. 96, No. 5

[2] The Baath Movement, Adam Trusner, Iraq War Course, Spring 2010

[3] Pan-Arab Nationalism: The Ideological Dream as Compelling Force, Burry Rubin, Journal of Contemporary History, Vol. 26, No. 3/4

[4] The Iran Revolution, Adam Trusner, Iraq War Course, Spring 2010
