---
date: '2010-04-28 22:57:31'
layout: post
slug: None
status: draft
title: The Fallacy of Military Occupation
wordpress_id: '956'
categories:
- Twitter
---

The march to Baghdad in April, 2003 symbolized a triumph of the United States military force. However, the premature occupation policies of Iraq caused more chaos and uncertainty. Conventional wisdom suggests that the longer the military occupation is the more chaos it will create.  Contrarily, “The Surge”, Bush’s new way forward which essentially meant to send more troops to Iraq harvested many positive effects in the past three years. To many politicians, it seems now that sending more military force can solve the problem. However, the successes in Iraq only proved that enforcing more police power and regulations can improve local security situation. It cannot justify the necessity to send more troops under similar situation in the future.

The military force is not the best police power to enforce law and order.  It can only be used as a police power for a very short time. The Allies had successfully used military forces to maintain order in after-war Germany and Japan. However, in Germany and Japan case, the Allies forces handed the security tasks back to local police after a short period of occupation. However, in Iraq case, the too-soon-ended war put the strategists in Washington to a situation that the after-war plan was not fully thought out and need to be implemented. During the debaathification, most local police forces were dismissed; it took much longer to assemble an effective security force. In the meantime, the U.S. military got more involved to the local security matter. The U.S. soldiers on ground were incompetent to recognize civilian interests and protect them from terrorists. The soldiers are trained to quickly recognize the threat and took action to it. They tended to be frightened in all situations. The recent video from Wikileaks showed how the frightened soldiers killed BBC reporters under very poor judgment to the situation. It is reasonable for soldiers to kill military-like target in war, but it became an unacceptable action to civilians in rebuilding process.  The soldiers are not policemen. It is expensive in term of time and cost to enforce law and order with military force.

The local resident involvement was a more effective factor in the improvement of the Iraq security situation. During the time of “the Surge”, the U.S. government settled an agreement with Sunni militias in the east to secure the border with Syria. The Iraq government force also won an important battle with Mahdi Army in that time. These events featured the establishment of the Iraq local police force. Many Iraqis  felt that the U.S. occupation, besides the military existence, brought very few benefits to Iraqi in general. The civilian casualties caused by crossfire further imposed the U.S. occupation into a bad position. Even it had many positive effects to the overall security situation, sending more troops in Iraq to enforce regulations was harder to be accepted than the local police by the regular Iraqis. More than 65% Iraqis objected to the U.S. occupation which arguably, further weakened the effect of “the Surge”.

If the success of “Surge” was built upon the reinforcement of police power, for the future similar operation, we only need to send more security forces instead of raw troops. If the U.S. would like to deploy a more aggressive foreign policy, it should form a new bureau, which is much like the Homeland Security to the domestic security issues, to deal with foreign security issues. Instead of sending battle troops to “the Surge”, we can deploy people from the new bureau who are trained to deal with security issues. In such way, we may eliminate many negative effects brought by sending more soldiers to a foreign land and avoid hate against the U.S. occupation.

Someone may suggest that the new battle troops are better in dealing with terrorism, thus, the positive effect of “the Surge” was more contributed by the fact that the new troops effectively defeated terrorist's threats. Maybe local police force is not the best option to deal with terrorist's threats, but in my opinion, the U.S. cooperation with Sunnis was a larger contributor to the drop down of foreign terrorist activities. Many foreign fighters, namely those worked for AQI were believed to enter the nation through border with Syria. By cooperating with Sunni militias to secure the border with Syria, the U.S. had the chance to stop new incoming foreign fighters and defeat the terrorists in Iraq. The fact is that during the time of “the Surge”, more troops were dispatched for jobs like securing street and public gathering place, which are just like what normal police force will do.
