---
date: '2010-11-08 09:41:32'
layout: post
slug: None
status: draft
title: Darwin and Wallance
wordpress_id: '1054'
categories:
- 随感
---

Darwin reached his initial enlightenment on Natural Selection quite early in his year. But he anticipated criticisms, mass of them. The idea of Natural Selection and inner-group struggling was so novel, he believed no one would hold the same idea. Besides, the two questions: the origin of life and the origin of man left unanswered. Darwin was not in hurry. He was experimenting in his yard, collecting evidences and talking to breeders. He aimed at perfection, a theory that answers all. And Charles Darwin had resources. He was an English gentleman and even before his returning from the Beagle, he became a well-known naturalist already. He shared the idea with few friends, but never rushed to publication, the evolution needs time, and so did he.

Wallace, on the other hand, was very excited on his own discovery of natural selection. Born in a middle-class family and spent most of his life time overseas, Wallace was an eager mind that struggles to be recognized by the scientific community. He was also a reader of Darwin's Journal of Researches, but much out of Darwin's surprise, he came to the natural selection idea by his own. The pressure was on Darwin's side.

In some sense, the scientific community is very cruelty. The 2nd discoverer came with little glory. Charles Darwin knew that, but as an English gentleman, he did help Wallace while he could. But for Darwin, the pressure was obvious, he needed to publish now with all the evidences he had. He had read the old evolutionist publications, the Vestiges and Lamarck's theory. He knew the problem with them: the lack of evidence. It was his life work to collect the evidences, and he didn't have the problem. But he need to carefully organize them, to nail it down. So, Darwin avoided the harder problems: the origin of life and the origin of man. He wanted to nail down the answer that he most confident with, the origin of species.

So he started the writing in 1858, with a humble beginning of breeding. If breeding was possible, so was the variations. If human selection can create new species, so was natural selection. It was quick. Darwin had these ideas floating around for years. After all, it was his lifetime work. Darwin got all kinds of help from scientific community, partly because he was renowned naturalist himself, partly because the theory itself was very interesting. He also got a grateful letter from Wallace which was a real relief for him. After two month of proof-reading and corrections, the first edition of the Origin of Species was published. It is a 509 pages book, not too big to be totally unreadable. Actually, it was a popular reading, and the science inside was obvious. Charles Darwin only needed to sit and harvest all the criticisms he anticipated for years.

From today's point of view, the 19 centuries scientific community was very interesting one. There were few interesting things going on in the case of the Origin of Species. The community was, surprisingly, quite open, I dare to say, even more open than current one. Wallace, even as hardworking as he was, could send his manuscript to a renowned naturalist by his own, it was fascinating. A scientific book could become a popular reading, that was unimaginable in today's world. Even as well-known as Steven Hawkins, the book of the Grand Design is still tagged with popular science. The problem of a very open scientific community was lack of professionalism. With all my respect to Charles Darwin and Alfred Wallace, the Origin of Species deserved the criticism of lacking proof. The book lacks of footprint, and the experiments were not repeatable or lack of details on setup. Darwin made philosophical arguments more than scientific ones. The scientific publication criteria clearly changed after a century.

The race between Darwin and Wallace was certainly an interesting one. But from the reading, it wasn't as deadly, cruelty as I imagined. It seems that the classes and the social status played a big role here. Even Wallace got every detail independently, it quite unlikely that he would collect enough evidences in time to proceed. As long as Darwin was willing to give him credit, Wallace seems quite happy as a defender to Darwin's theory. That was, to some extend, less Dramatically as a dead race to scientific discovery. As gentleman as Darwin was, it was unlikely that without Darwin, the 19 centuries won't discover the law of evolution. However, the coincidence shouldn't down play Darwin's contribution. As far as Wallace had got, it was an interesting theory, just as interesting as Lamarck's or in Vestiges. Darwin set out differently. He didn't want to get well-known because of a proposal of interesting theory, he was quite famous already. He wanted to establish the theory, a theory that needs no Creator. Thus, the ambitious goal put him into the role as the discoverer of Natural Selection.
